For a wide range of reasons, researchers are interested in (UWSNs). These include water quality and environment monitoring, disaster and earthquake prediction, surveillance by the military and underwater navigation. Nevertheless, there are a lot of drawbacks and difficulties that come with the aquatic medium, including a high multipath delay, high levels of interference and noise, a harsh atmosphere, a poor bandwidth, and a short battery life for the sensor nodes. Yet, there are several obstacles to a successful deployment of underwater wireless sensor networks. The issue of sensor node energy depletion is the main cause for concern in the underwater sensor network. These problems require the use of good research methodologies and strategies to solve them. In this study, an Energy-Aware Multilevel Clustering with Wake-up Sleep Algorithm is developed to prolong the lifespan of the underwater wireless sensor network.
SCOPE OF THE PROJECT:
These problems require the use of good research methodologies and strategies to solve them. In this study, an Energy-Aware Multilevel Clustering with Wake-up Sleep Algorithm is developed to prolong the lifespan of the underwater wireless sensor network. The oceanic network region is thought to be a series of multi-level, 3D cylinders. High water pressure directed at the sea floor creates communication problems that are resolved by many layers of differing heights. The effectiveness of the suggested method is demonstrated by simulations, which demonstrate that it performs better interms of an extended network lifespan , average residual energy and many more factors. In comparison to the results of the simulation with current ones, the network lifespan has significantly increased.The network model taken into account by the suggested Energy-Aware Multi-Level Clustering Method with wakeup sleep Algorithm (EAMC with WSA) for Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks is described in this section. Cylinder is used to define the network area. The transmission range of the sensor's sensor is represented by r. The cylinder is further split into sectors. The network deployment region's maximum depth is the same as the cylinder's height. Each cylinder has multiple plates or levels. Each structure's height varies depending on the transmission loss caused by water pressure, which decreases as depth increases. The suggested method uses Block as a primary partition since clusters are built at each Block. Cluster Head (CH) nodes are chosen from each Block. The beacon message broadcasting technique provides the basis for CH selection. By distributing its residual energy (RE) and distance from the Block center to all of its neighbouring nodes, a node that has more RE than the energy threshold can participate in the CH election. The energy threshold is defined as the average block energy. The node with the highest residual energy and the closest proximity to the center is chosen as the cluster head. The cluster members' communication range with CH is kept to a minimal by choosing nodes that are close to the block center. Once being chosen,the CH sends the elected message to each of its neighbours. The level of CH, residualenergy, and location coordinates are all included in the chosen message. A regular node replies to its CH with a joining message that includes the node id when it gets the elected message. If more than one CH sends an elected message to a node, the node will select the CH with the highest Fitness score (F). Based on each node's distance, remaining energy, and level, an independent estimate of the fitness value of CH is made. 


